[Music]
thanks guys I am Mary mcau and I am so
excited to be here I am the
engineering manager for the windows
forms team I've got short brown hair and
I'm wearing a bright blue T-shirt with
the Microsoft logo that you can't see
and my partner in crime here is Claus
yeah I'm Claus I'm a deaf on the Wind
fors team um I'm a little bit taller
than Mary
slightly um I have whatever hair color I
have what is it like brown brown I would
say brown yeah and um and yeah so that's
that's about me and we're here to tell
you about some of the cool modern things
that we're able to do with Wind forms
development Inn net 9 so I'm going to
break down our agenda into kind of four
main chunks of stuff that we're going to
talk about we're going to talk about
some of the highlights the new and
exciting things that we've added to Wind
forms and kind of our Focus that we've
been um the the North Stars that we've
been looking at as we've been working in
Wind fors then we're going to get to a
little bit more of a serious mode where
we talk about security because security
is a number one thing here at Microsoft
and it's important for Wind forms as
well finally we're going to get into or
next we're going to get into some of I
think the most exciting new develop
velopments in Wind forms and that's the
Simplicity in which we can do
asynchronous development and finally a
quick wrap up and a Bo mind-bogglingly
long list of resources for you to use as
you're developing your winforms
applications and taking advantage of the
modern news
stuff so to start with taking a look at
what's new in winforms for.net N I want
to talk about some of the key Focus
areas that we've always been kind of
thinking about first of all is our
Community Driven Focus we are a Vibrant
Community in GitHub right now the
community has been driving features from
the very first PR that we ever took in
wi forums back onstage for net core 3.1
thanks Scott for uh merging that one
without telling me that was the second
one that was good that was good yes and
in net n we've added the um fer browser
dialogues multi- select option we've
done a lot of nullability work is driven
by the community and and much much more
as I mentioned a moment ago though the
security focus is something that has
been across all of libraries and you
know all of the other parts ofn net and
winforms is a huge piece of that for us
binary format or removal has really made
us do some internal changes that may not
be as VIs visible to the outside world
but allow us to continue working in a
world where binary formatter is no
longer present yes I mean we have
resource files and the binary format was
always a big dependency on that and um
resource files are not going away in
right embedded resources are here to
stay of course we've got a performance
Focus that's something that really makes
Wind forms in core standout orb forms in
net standout from NET Framework we're
able to take advantage of all of the
modern C language features that enable
us to improve performance we've improved
our interop um as a matter of fact we've
migrated most of our libraries to um a
modern interop tool called
cs132 that does code generation for all
of our inot and the advantage there the
big thing there is that now with it
being code generated we know that it's
accurate consistent and performant all
the way across the board um everybody
likes you enhancements and this release
has been no different than any other
release uh one of my personal little
favorites I know it's tiny but um
system. drawing now has a uh rounded
rectangle and the ability to do image
formats like convert an image to black
and white or put a green cast over it
it's funny right because this is a
feature that has been requested like for
the last 15 years and it's such a little
thing but then um it really made an
impact already oh yeah and the reason
that we were able to do that if we go
back to Modern interop because cs132
makes it easy for us to consume Windows
apis 132 apis uh the ones that maybe we
didn't in the past were able to pull in
new things from GDI GDI plus and make
system drawing that much more robust oh
and you know what we have forgotten one
thing to to mention we also did
something for Visual Basic and that was
and we had a couple of
uh updates for the project system and um
I think we also had quite recently a
blog post about that well it's a little
bit longer ago already right but um it's
definitely worth checking that out
because Visual Basic is still 20 yes
percenti is of Wind forms customers even
in the net land so we want to make sure
that our net Visual Basic net customers
are still able to be supported and then
of course for me like I said the most
exciting work that we've been doing is
in the asynchronous support because the
world has changed from when Wind forms
was created it's changed into an
asynchronous sort of environment and we
need to be able to work with that all
right I'm going to hand it over now to
clouse for a demo about wind fors
getting a glow up as the kids would like
to call it usually but some cool stuff
we've done in Wind forms I hope I hope I
hope people will like it so um let me
start with just um a look on the typical
Wind forms app as you know it well might
look already a little bit different um
this is a photo viewer that I wrote this
morning
um that um where I just had a couple of
photos um that that I did the other day
from from this from this studio here um
but let me let me show something that is
really
um that is really new and really
requested a lot and that is the the Wind
forms dark mode so to to modernize your
apps um it's really often all about the
look and feel and I would say that dark
mode at this point almost became an
accessibility issue so I know a lot of
people who are really you know wanted to
have this this dark mode not to be able
to be blinded by bright colors um but
it's it's also of course a preference so
disclaimer um before we go into it this
is for net 9 still a experimental
feature and what what that means is that
when you are starting to use it you will
be flagged a little bit by the compiler
and um and need to adjust um your editor
config setting uh settings to make it
work but let me show you really quick
how easy it is to actually have that
light mode typical wind fors app and
then you know make a dark mode out of it
so um we have the application object and
that's usually the place where we where
we always set up
the kind of like the base for the whole
application and new in uh in net 9 is
the set color mode and what I can do
with it is um I have now the system
colors
enum which gives me three options and
it's quite simple we have the dark mode
we have classic and then we have system
and what system does is it just takes
over whatever settings you had set up
for your windows environment so if
you're using the light mode your wind
fors app at that point will be light
mode and if you do dark mode then it
will be dark mode so with this change
made uh let me just restart it and um
hopefully um we should see Tada that
thing already in action well there's one
thing though that you see and of course
this black text um on on the item
doesn't doesn't really look like very
readable now so when you are you know
right ramping up your apps so that they
are dark mode compatible there's um
there's an easy way then to take those
things into account um in this case we
have
a we have a new uh property which is
also um on the application object and
that is um is dark mode enabled so in
other words we can do just this and uh
let me quickly try to get this work
with my note
book which I hate actually to type on so
and so if the dark mode is enabled
then we are using a rather lighter color
in that or brighter color in that regard
and now let me start that again and we
should see that now the text is still
dark H Okay so
the demo Gods that's the way it usually
works yeah and um what does it mean that
this is an experimental feature
CLA so what that exactly means is that
we have the moment you use an
experimental feature in net per se it's
not necessarily the dark mode then the
compiler will show you an error message
and then if it does that then there are
several options that you can do
um there will be showing up an analyzers
where you can pick that you want to have
a fix inside of um the code directly or
if you want to have that Global for your
whole solution or for the whole project
then the analyzer can also set up a
setting for the editor config um and
that was not it let me bring up the
text uh for that editor config so we can
and you know focus on that that single
setting and then um you will see that
that diagnostic that is responsible for
pointing out that it is in dark mode you
can just adjust then to you know like
put your level of warnings the way you
want it like if it is an arrow or if it
is a um if it is silent so it doesn't
really uh bother you at all so this is
the only thing that you need to do and
um and yeah so that that is the way um
you're best going to use it um what's
important what we want to mention is um
we need feedback that's why it's
experimental is because there's a lot of
ux and Wind forms a lot of UI in Wind
forms and we haven't gotten to it all
and we're wanting the feedback as well
to make sure from the community that the
approaches that we've taken are the
approaches that that we want moving
forward so I'm going to go ahead and
switch gears now and steal the show back
for myself because you know I like the
attention uh actually it's because I do
want to cover a pretty serious topic and
an important topic and that is the
security first focus with binary format
or
removal first and foremost the number
one thing for me to tell everybody is
that binary formatter is unsafe it is
not something that we recommend and we
have been slowly working our way towards
removing binary form matter for years in
net 9 the implementation code the inbox
implementation actually is removed from
the libraries code and put into a
separate out of b outof band package or
an Uub package as we' like to call it um
and this is the final stage of the
binary format or deprecation or
obsoletion plan and this plan's actually
been going on for quite a while um we
announced it in Net 5 where we said we
Ely want to remove binary form matter
because it's unsafe because it can cause
some of the
um system uh uh what's the word um
remote code execution thank you very
much yeah that's that's the old age
coming in um so it can do system uh
remote code execution it can do denial
of service it can do all sorts of things
that um if you're not super careful with
it that can really cause problems in
security vulnerabilities so we decided
in Net 7 that the all of the
dependencies that could be removed have
been removed inet 8 it was obsoleted and
for almost all of the workloads it was
throwing exceptions by default and the
exception there of course was Windows
desktop because as clus mentioned
earlier we use resources and we do
embedded resources which use a lot of
potentially binary formatter
serialization um in February we
announced that binary formatter was
going to be pulled out of the product
and in August that was completed in the
intervening time here what I have to do
a huge shout out to uh the team to
Jeremy Cooney to Adam sitnik to Jeff
Handley to lonni tr um they really came
together and pulled it out of the run
time and
replaced a lot of internal winforms
implementations so Keynotes to to be
aware of um the implementation is gone
it is removed to a package if you depend
on it you actually have two steps that
you're going to need to do you're going
to have to say I want to use binary
formatter enable this unsafe binary
formatter and now you'll also have to
add a package um embedded resources most
of the time now don't actually need
binary formatter because we've done our
own internal work to remove that and
finally the thing I'm going to demo in
just a few moments here is that we've
got new analyzers that will warn you if
you've inadvertently started to use
binary form matter yeah and when in the
time where Mary set up her demo demo um
I want to want to say something to the
analyzers that is something that we
really want to want to add on foret 10
and build in more guidance um in general
to make your Wind forms code more secure
so um there are so many places where we
can use analyzers for for this security
guidance and it's certainly something
you would you are going to see much more
in in the Run quite a bit of okay so let
me bring up my demo here and what I've
got is a net8 application and it has a
form with an address control that
address control has a few fields on it
um
and we're running it in net 8 and I'm
going to build and you'll see that I um
actually probably need to um clean and
rebuild I must have accidentally hit a
space bar
somewhere nope that's not
it me just a second here new line in a
constant I told you I hit a space
bar how about I do
that yeah that happens to me all that
Happ me way too often okay so now I'm
going to build that is much better much
happier and now we're down to zero
errors and a bunch of warnings that
don't really matter now if I go to my
form here and I'm going to go to my
button click code oh address one one
away let
me go to my button one click I've
actually got a place here where I'm
going to
force binary serialization and this is
just to tell you that there are going to
be places where maybe third-party
components maybe old components that
you've written in VB6 or whatnot may
need binary form matter the funny thing
is that we really tried hard to find
meanwhile um a scenario where we hit the
binary formatter but Jeremy did such a
good job that um it was almost hard to
to get there to to get there right all
right so I built I've got an error and
that error is because U let me come back
in here it is because binary format is
not supported this is the DT net 8
obsoletion that we were talking about so
I'm going to go to my code and enable
the binary formatter serialization this
is what we did in net 8 and of course
that run you know compiles everybody's
happy but now let's change it to net 9
really quick and I move it to nine let
me save I'm going to do a quick clean
because that always seems to make things
go a little smoother and a rebuild
[Music]
and things are looking really good and I
think that might be
because oh there they are I've got the
two errors that I was looking for the
two errors are because I've got these
public properties and the public
properties first name and special
property if I take a look at them me put
my cursor here let the um help come up
it says that I do not have the
serialization information set for this
particular property so I'm going to say
that I want to hide it from
serialization so that I am forcing it
not to use binary formatter because by
default it might and that's not what I
want so that's where the error message
comes in handy and when I build things
are good things are working just fine
but remember I had that code that was
using binary formatter in my
form mhm when I hit my button at run
runtime I am now getting a compiler
error or a runtime error saying platform
not supported that's because the binary
format or implementation code was
removed and I need to come back and say
and pull in that package um to do that
let me stop my
application and let me go back to my
code here you pull in the package group
simple as that is this what I'm supposed
to be doing is this how I want my app to
run forever
no this is unsafe and unsupported but it
will get us through the time where I
need to go in and investigate how to
move to system text Json deserialization
or some other custom type converters
that I might have and I'll go ahead and
run everything is happy and I should um
oh I needed
to I needed to clean because I did
something in my project file
and there we go it's all working
beautifully now that's the serious stuff
binary form matter is going away it's
important that everybody's aware of it
but it's kind of like a speed bump we're
not making development faster and easier
we're making it safer we're making
people sit back and kind of pay
attention I do want to give clouse now
the wheel for the next four minutes
because he's going to show us about
async in four minutes exactly uh but
we've got another we've got a whole
another talk where you're C some cool
stuff we need to we we definitely need
to do more yeah all right so CLA take
over okay so um and it's a funny motive
now because it's showing a binary clock
um so um really quick then um it's about
it's about asynchronous um programming
in in in Wind forms um we had that
before that we could like 20 years ago
already we were able to do um
asynchronous programming and we had apis
that we're starting with begin and it's
time for those to end because um it was
just It produced so much spaghetti coat
that nobody really could use it so in
because of the of the time that we no
longer have um let me quickly show you
um the essence of what we have been
doing so what you see here is a spinner
control that that is just like iterating
through a very special font type um and
at the same time it'll show the the
color bar and it's also fleshing so and
um that is so cool because you're now
writing you're using the uh UI thread
from two different processes from two
different things that you're trying to
do and that's not something that Wind
forms has ever been good at doing and
and I just want to point out by code um
how easy it is to do that so if you are
experienced winforms developer you know
that if you click and you double double
click then of course the click event
comes at the same time right so when I
double clicked both of those things
happened and if you take a look at the
code now you see that we're waiting in
the click event the the the spinner to
to turn but then in the double click at
the same time we are waiting the color
blender um to do its job so the way
you're setting up those things that are
doing you know things in parallel
because the message queue is always
running it's like a very very easy thing
and so now the question is should we do
should we skip the other demo and should
directly go to that the the kind of fun
one um yeah let's go ahead and move to
uh some of the applica the real world
application of a scenario where async
programming is going to uh change the
world when it comes to a Wind forms app
so adding this kind of capability the
asynchronous capability to your existing
line of business applications and wi
forms take it away exactly so what this
is is taking the async features and then
as we said before being able to use all
those new apis that are basically only
providing their apis in an Asing form in
this app and by the way we have another
talk that is prerecorded where which
explains in detail how this works
um was exactly how how to do that so let
me quickly show that um I'm this is like
um a driver's lock sample and let me
just type in a couple of stops here like
I'm going from Duval to Monroe and then
to Bellingham and I don't have time so I
will do all kinds of you are terrible at
spelling yeah but it doesn't really
matter because I'm sending it over to an
llm and getting it back and so it gets
corrected and assisted automatically uh
while I'm working and this counts for
everything that is here on the Forum and
wow so so all these web apis and the the
open API open AI apis they all are
asynchronous and we're able to now as
part of the FL of a winforms app just be
able to incorporate that which is really
exciting now I'm going to take back over
to the PowerPoint in a quick wrap-up
since we are just about out of time um
so we did our demo for async here's our
wrapup for re and
resources we talked about one
experimental feature in net 9 and that
was the dark mode now the control.
invoke async that klouse was showing
with his work just a moment ago that's
not experimental that's a that's a real
thing exactly but we wanted to take it a
step further we wanted to see if maybe a
form. show async and a form. show
dialogue async would be something that
people would take advantage of so those
two are added also as experimental
features the warning here is that all of
these are still in flux and there might
be some slight changes but they're in
enough state we are able to get the
feedback and want the feedback from our
customers about it so please use these
go to our GitHub repo file the
issues submit some PRS for some of the
issues we wouldn't argue with that um
and that's our big thing with these
experimental features is give us the
feedback and finally some resources I'll
make sure that these are uh all linked
for you when you get to the presentation
on
YouTube and of course our stand get.
net9 and thank you very much